Without warning, our faith
could suddenly be tested
by how we react in a violent encounter.
Yes, our faith may be tested as Enoch’s was.
Ungodliness and violence
were commonplace before the Flood,
and the Scriptures clearly indicate
how people reacted.
We are told that the faithful man Enoch
chose to walk with God.
So when he was threatened,
he looked to Jehovah for security.
On the other hand, Lamech,
a descendant of the murderer Cain,
opted to provide his own security.
This led to killing a man
in supposed self-defense.
Now, Enoch and the killer Lamech
both lived in a violent world,
but their violence-reaction plans
were totally different.
As we descend deeper into the last days,
people will become more desperate
and violence will only escalate.
In the following dramatization,
let’s see how reacting to violence
could suddenly become
a personal test of faith in Jehovah.
My son barely escaped the gangs
—again.
We’re the only ones without a gun.
I don’t want to keep a gun for protection.
But how else can I protect my family?
In today’s violent society,
even in the perceived safest
of neighborhoods,
we could have a similar experience.
If so, how can we imitate Enoch’s faith?
For one thing, he recognized
a simple but fundamental truth:
Jehovah hates violence.
So for us to walk with God as Enoch did,
we must reject violence as an option.
What can help us to do that?
Don’t harbor retaliatory thoughts.
Violent thoughts can lead to violent actions,
without thinking about the consequences.
Learn to recognize situations
that could harm us;
then act to avoid the danger.
That’s the counsel given at Proverbs 22:3:
“The shrewd one sees the danger
and conceals himself,
but the inexperienced keep right on going
and suffer the consequences.”
So we’re encouraged to conceal ourselves
if we sense danger.
Think ahead, look around, be perceptive,
and avoid situations that may become violent.
Avoid violent entertainment.
Why?
It frequently portrays a violent response
when a character’s safety is threatened.
All sorts of objects or weapons
are depicted as strategies
to kill or overpower the opponents.
While Christians may take reasonable steps
to ensure their personal security,
they do so within the framework
of Bible principles.
Consider these three scriptures
as you make decisions
about your family’s security needs.
David prayed at Psalm 51:14:
“Save me from bloodguilt.”
He never wanted to be guilty of murder.
Preparing a response
that includes the use of weapons
could result in taking a life.
If a Christian takes reasonable steps
to defend himself or his property,
he would do everything in his power
to avoid taking a human life
and become bloodguilty.
At Matthew 26:52, Jesus warned
that ‘those who draw the sword
shall die by the sword.’
It’s well-established
that when weapons are displayed,
situations usually escalate
with tragic outcomes.
Planning to use a deadly weapon
could effectively dismiss Jehovah’s spirit
from our presence.
To pull away from Jehovah
is the last thing we want to do
in a dangerous situation.
A third is found at Ecclesiastes 9:18,
where it simply says:
“Wisdom is better than weapons.”
In other words, being armed
cannot match wisdom.
The prudent course is to trust in Jehovah,
not weapons.
God’s Word wisely teaches us
to daily show respect, consideration,
and genuine kindness to others.
This approach of pursuing peace
will often minimize
otherwise potential conflicts.
Isn’t it true, violent struggles often begin
with a heated exchange of words?
So calmness can often defuse anger
and deflect violent conflicts.
Here’s something else to consider.
The Bible book of Jude
says that Enoch prophesied to his opposers.
This means that he was a preacher.
Being known
as a courageous Witness of Jehovah
and showing compassion
for those to whom we preach
is always our best protection.
How was Enoch rewarded
for putting his faith in Jehovah?
Note the answer at Hebrews 11:5:
“By faith Enoch was transferred
so as not to see death,
“and he was nowhere to be found
because God had transferred him;
“for before he was transferred
he received the witness
that he had pleased God well.”
Enoch was rewarded with the knowledge
that “he had pleased God well.”
In some manner, in a very clear way,
he was given assurance of Jehovah’s approval.
How comforting to know
that if we face dangerous encounters
with no good way out,
like Enoch, we too can handle
that test of faith
in a way that will please God well!
In the following dramatization,
note how our brother
imitates Enoch’s example.
Hebrews 11:1:
“Faith is the assured expectation
of what is hoped for.”
I do have faith in God’s promises,
but if a gun is what I need
to protect my family,
won’t Jehovah understand?
No, I couldn’t do that.
I’m not the first to face a violent world.
Hebrews 11:5:
“. . . received the witness
that he had pleased God well.”
Enoch lived among extreme violence,
but he walked with God.
I can imitate his faith.
Did you notice
this brother’s violence-reaction plan?
His faith in God’s promises helped him
to look to Jehovah for security
instead of a gun.
He realized he was not the first
to face a violent world
and made the firm decision
to imitate the faith of Enoch.
So now, prior to a violent confrontation,
what can we do to be sure our reaction plan
will be pleasing to Jehovah?
Imitate Enoch in these four ways.
Build our faith and confidence in Jehovah now
before we are tested in a violent situation.
Reject violent thoughts.
Don’t allow the violent movies
or violent video games
that are sponsored by the Devil
to train your children or yourselves
on how to react in a violent confrontation.
Reject the idea that you will prepare
yourselves with weapons.
And fearlessly keep preaching
as Enoch did.
In this way, even if we find ourselves
in a violent situation,
our violence-reaction plan
will allow us to imitate Enoch
and please God well.
Brother John Ekrann,
a helper to the Coordinators’ Committee,
will now consider the next talk
of this symposium,
“Imitate the Faithful, Not the Faithless
—Noah, Not His Neighbors.”